Hello everyone. Thank you so much for
joining us at another YouTube for
artists masterass. Today we're going to
chat about live streaming on YouTube and
the real-time experiences you can create
with it for your fans. Whether you're a
savvy streamer or deciding to go live
for the first time on YouTube, we'll dig
into YouTube's tools that can help you
engage with your fans deeper and make
content something fans can truly
experience with you. First things first,
let me introduce myself. My name is
Chenise and I'm an artist partnerships
manager for air in London. I spent my
last seven years championing the
underrepresented voices on the platform.
I've had the privilege of working with
some of your favorite global artists
like Whiskid, Dave, Georgia Smith, Pink
Panthers, Ray H, and more. Today we're
going to talk about the foundations of
live streaming, how to integrate live
tools into your release schedule, and
tips to level up your live strategy.
We'll also be showcasing some great
artists who've done a really good job at
utilizing the live streaming tools. If
you have any questions, be sure to drop
them in the live chat so your local reps
can dig into them after. With that,
let's get started.
So, why go live on YouTube? For
starters, it's a powerful way for you to
support your music, both creatively and
strategically.
Going live on YouTube gives fans and new
audiences a front row seat to your
biggest moments as they happen. YouTube
allows you to use real-time energy to
rally your audience around moments both
big and small to help fans feel like
they're there with you. And the best
part, it's all up to you. You control
the scale from a full production to a
casual session right from your phone.
You pick the subject. You can
personalize the live stream and create
the experience exactly how you want it
for fans and bring fans into your world.
Going live can also help boost your
revenue. You can sell tickets to your
live show, tag products for fans to
shop, enable supers for direct support,
and run ads during your stream.
It's also an opportunity to deepen the
connection with your fans by creating
unforgettable real-time moments. Imagine
a global community of fans chatting,
reacting, and engaging directly with you
and each other. This transforms passive
viewing into shared experiences,
building a loyal community that invested
in your next release. Live streams can
also expand your reach. YouTube's
algorithm recommends your stream to new
viewers, and when streams remain
available on demand, you can continue
attracting new fans long after your live
stream is over. In fact, we're seeing
fans show up for live stream content
more and more. In early 2025, over 30%
of YouTube users watch live streams on
average. The appetite for live content
continues to grow, so why not take
advantage of the momentum? Once
[clears throat] you decide you want to
add live streaming to your YouTube
strategy, where do you start? Well, in
order to live stream on your channel,
you need to check a few boxes. First,
you'll need to verify your channel with
a mobile number. You'll also need to
have no live stream restrictions in the
last 90 days. And most importantly,
you'll need to enable live streaming on
your channel. If it's your first time
going live on YouTube, please remember
it's incredibly important to enable live
streaming at least 24 hours before you
plan to stream. If you don't follow
these steps ahead of your time, you may
risk delaying your stream. To enable
live streaming, head over to YouTube and
tap the create button marked with a plus
sign on either mobile or desktop. Click
or swipe to go live and enable live
streaming by requesting live stream
access and verify their mobile connected
to your channel. From there, you'll be
brought to the live control room, which
will allow you to manage your stream.
More on that in just a few minutes. Once
you're all set to start your first live
stream, it's time to plan what kind of
stream you'll have. We typically see
live streams for into either casual live
streams, think candid lives to casual
chat with fans in real time or show what
you're up to, or 10 pole streams, but
around a major moment such as a music
video premiere, an album anniversary, a
big announcement, and even a major
performance. Take Tomorrow by Together
for example. They gathered fans on a
live stream to celebrate their album the
star chapter together and they did a
lot. They unboxed their new album merch
for the first time, demonstrated the
callography to their new music, answer
trivia questions related to the album,
previewed a new music video, and played
some fun games. They checked in and
responded live to fan comments
throughout the hourong stream. Their
stream saw a 90% global audience of
returning viewers to the channel,
generating over 540,000 chat reactions.
Fans not only showed up, but were
excited to watch and engage with one of
their favorite artists. Live engagement
can turn fans into active participants.
Next, decide what type of device you
want to stream from. There are multiple
methods of streaming: mobile, desktop,
webcam, encoder, and console. And
finally, choose the aspect ratio you
want to stream in, vertical or
horizontal. Can't decide? On YouTube,
you don't have to. You can actually
stream in both formats at the exact same
time. If you're already planning a
horizontal stream, just toggle on the
dual streaming in the live control room
to add a vertical feed. While it's not
required, we highly recommend doing both
to maximize your reach since vertical
streams land right in front of your
viewers scrolling the short feed. For
example, Yeri Ma is an artist who used
Vertical Life to connect with fans right
before the release of her Dear Trevor
Deluxe album. She gave fans a
behindthescene look at getting ready for
her new release event while also talking
about new music fans were about to hear.
Ultimately, the choice is yours based on
your preference and what feels authentic
to you. Once you have the live stream
enabled and you know how you plan to go
live, you're ready to start or schedule
your stream. To go live, simply select
the create button with a plus size on
mobile or desktop and select go live.
Where you want to go live on the spot,
schedule a future live stream, or just
test a stream on an unlisted or private
link. You can manage and monitor your
live stream in the live control room.
Let's quickly walk through how to set up
a live stream and navigate the live
control room. If it's your first time
streaming, you'll see a pop-up welcoming
you to YouTube live control room. Since
we are scheduling a stream, select later
since we're going to be using existing
webcam. We'll next select builtin
webcam. From here, you'll fill out the
details of your upcoming stream.
Starting on the details tab, you'll be
asked to add a title and a description.
Choose a stream category, add a
thumbnail, and choose your audience
setting. Additionally, you can add the
stream to any pre-existing playlist if
you would like. Then, tap next.
Depending on your channel, you may see a
rights management section where your
label or distributor to ensure this is
filled out properly.
Next, if your channel is monetizing,
you'll be brought to the monetization
section where you'll be able to choose
your streaming monetization settings. If
not, you'll head straight onto the
customization section. Under
customization, you could choose to
enable live chat, select who can
participate in the chat, and more.
Tap next again to be brought to the
visibility section where you can select
your live stream's visibility as well as
choose your schedule time. If you're
still waiting to add additional
information to your stream before the
watch page goes live, we recommend
having it listed under private or
unlisted. Once completed, select done.
You've now scheduled your first stream.
You'll be brought to the stream preview
window where you can edit your stream's
title, schedule time, and visibility.
Here you can also have a deep dive into
the chat settings including community
moderators, participants, and more. To
close this window, select done.
Once it's time for your live stream, you
can navigate back into the live control
room via YouTube Studios by selecting
create button and then selecting go
live.
When you're ready to go live, navigate
the manage tab on the left side and
select your live streams title. You will
be brought to the stream preview window.
Once again, when you are ready, select
go live. Once you get the hang of live
basics, you may be wondering, how can I
add customizations and special features
to my live stream? This is where Encoder
comes in, which allows you to unlock
further customizations for your stream.
An encoder lets you share your screen,
use external cameras and microphones,
use multiple audio tracks, or add
special effects on screen. You can also
use third-party tools to stream with
multiple remote participants or use
screen sharing software and manage an
advanced production with multiple
cameras, video inputs, microphones, and
media assets. Keep in mind, each encoder
has different capabilities and require
different setups. If you want to use
encoder in an upcoming stream, you can
check out the list of verified ones you
can choose from in our help center. For
a step-by-step walkthrough on how to set
up a live stream using encoder in the
live control room, check out our
resources tab. Now that we've gone over
some foundations of going live, let's
talk strategy, specifically how to weave
live streaming into your release cycle.
We've broken the release cycle into
three phases. Pre-release before a new
release is out, release day, the day
that you release a new music or video,
and post-release after your release is
out. Let's walk through each one. In the
pre-release phase, set up your video
premiere and plan a live stream before
or after your premiere to build hype and
momentum around the release. You could
also utilize a live redirect to funnel
the audience seamlessly from your live
stream to your music video or vice
versa. Be sure to also add a thumbnail
to schedule live stream to stand out.
And finally, promote your live stream
and or premiere across socials to gather
all your fans in one place on YouTube.
On the day of release, it's a good idea
to remind fans of your live stream or
premiere by sharing the link on socials.
Consider also reminding fans by creating
a post on YouTube. Finally, you can
upload a short right before and tag your
upcoming video as related video. If you
decide to go live before or after the
premiere, be sure your live stream is
engaging, answer fan questions, give
them a behind the scenes look, and make
it special. On the premiere page, stay
active in the chat and pin a greeting to
welcome fans.
Kenya O, for example, held a live stream
prior to her premiere of her music
video, Bella Donna, and saw 74% of her
watch time come from subscribers,
proving how live streams can be a
powerhouse for fan participation and
retentions. Fans even engage deeply
during the live stream, leaving 1
million reactions and 30,000 chat
messages. After your release is out, you
can archive the live stream as a video
on demand so fans can catch up or
re-watch the live stream, extending the
life of your content and adding to the
visual storytelling for your new music.
Taking from 21 Pilots, they use a live
stream to tease the new release of their
song and video drum song. They made the
content available on demand and the word
of the teaser got out amongst fans.
Views on the stream increased by 20%
globally in the first month after the
stream.
To continue engagement on your past live
stream, consider compiling highlights
from your stream and posting those
highlight clips to shorts. If you
feature another artist or a guest in
your live stream, you can also add
collaboration. Be sure to continue
engaging with fan comments under your
stream or premiered music video, too.
Now, let's take a closer look at
premieres and library direct to get a
better understanding how these features
connect together. A premier is a feature
that allows fans to watch a new music
video or any new video on a share watch
page with a live chat similar to how it
look like if you tune into a traditional
live stream. It could be a great way to
build hype and further anticipation for
your new release as well as strengthen
your community by allowing fans to
co-watch and react together. For
example, Theodora hosted a music video
for Masacono Mle where her most
dedicated fans were able to come
together, interact with each other,
share realtime reactions, including over
18,000 reactions during the premiere and
showed their support for the new music
video. In fact, on the first day of
release, more than 80% of global views
came from subscribers of her channel,
showing her fan base was anticipating
those new visuals. You can set up a
premiere during the upload process in
YouTube Studio by checking set as
premiere. A watch page is created as
soon as you set a video as a premiere.
Meaning you can share the link to your
watch page, leave comments, and engage
in the live chat before your premiere
even begins. Then you can personalize
your premiere, watch page, and
experience for fans. For instance, you
can add a trailer to hook viewers with a
15-second to 3 minute teaser that plays
on loop on your watch page until the
video is out. Pick a countdown theme by
setting a custom countdown timer in
YouTube Studio under setup premiere to
signal to fans that the main event is
about to start. Own the live chat. Drop
in the chat early to greet fans and set
the five. You can also pin a featured
message or reply directly to comments.
Remember, direct engagement can go a
long way for your fans. You can also
customize the chat to your comfort level
by assessing moderators, blocking
specific words, limiting the chat to
subscribers only, or turn it off
entirely. Drop premier merch and tag
release related products so fans can
shop while they watch. Consider
incentivizing fans by tuning in by
offering exclusive merch or a limited
item that is only available during the
premiere. Just make sure your virtual
merch store is connected to your YouTube
beforehand. Earlier we mentioned the
feature live direct. If enabled, live
direct brings fans from your live stream
directly to the premier watch page or
vice versa as it's about to start. Fans
don't even need to lift a finger. The
best part is super easy to set up and it
all be done right in YouTube studio.
First set up a premiere for an upcoming
video. Separately set up a schedule for
your live stream. Then add live redirect
even the YouTube studio or in the live
control room. People often get a live
stream, a live red direct, and Premier
Mix since they all work so seamlessly
together. So, let's break it down. A
live stream is what you traditionally
think when you go live, which includes a
content streaming live in real time.
Live redirect is a function that helps
bring the audience of a live stream
directly to a premiere or a new live
stream. Think of it as an usher bringing
your audience to their seats for the
main event. A premiere creates a live
experience around an ondemand video
through live chat. After the premiere
ends, the video appears just as a
digital video would with a live chat
replay available for fans to experience
the conversation again and again. So,
here's how all three tools work
together. You can start with a live
stream to connect with your fans. Use
live redirect to effortlessly guide them
to the premiere and then everyone enjoys
your new video together. Let's explore a
few tips and engaging hacks that help
you level up your live stream strategy
on YouTube. To start, make sure your
stream runs as smoothly as possible. To
ensure this, we recommend you keep these
tips in mind before you hit go live.
First, test your gear, connection, and
more at least one day in advance. Test
on an unlisted link so you and only your
team can troubleshoot the test run.
Second, clear your audio. If you're
planning to use copyright protected
audio, including your own music, we
recommend coordinating with your
distributor to make sure the stream is
clear to use with all the audio within
it. Otherwise, the stream may be
interrupted and flagged to our copyright
team by a content ID system. Third, prep
your chat guardrails and set up your
preferred moderation controls before the
camera rolls. And finally, draft a run
of show. While staying authentic is key,
mapping out a light schedule or talking
points beforehand can help maximize this
rare moment of undivided fan attention.
No matter the scale of your live stream,
you want as many fans to join as
possible. To build and engage your
YouTube audience, consider these key
ideas.
Publish compelling content. Maintain a
consistent upload cadence across both
shorts and long form video. Track your
stats. Keep a close eye on your YouTube
analytic studios.
Nurture your fandom. Engage directly
with your community and build spaces
where fans can connect with each other.
Drive reminders as Showtime approaches.
Actively encourage fans to hit the
reminder button.
Girls set a post to remind their fans of
the upcoming live stream celebrating the
release of their new track Commerce and
offered fans in LA the opportunity to
attend in person. This hype of a live
event can inspire fans to set reminders
and tune in. Something else to think
about is where fans are tuning into your
stream or premiere. More and more fans
enjoy major music moments on their TVs.
In fact, music fans watch an average of
more than 1.4 billion hours of music
videos every month on TVs in the late
2024 to early 2025. On TV screens, fans
can still see and participate in live
chat whilst watching a stream or a
premiere. Knowing this, it's a good
idea, if possible, to stream in the
highest quality you can. Take two
friends for example. They collaborated
on a live stream with Quinn92 in
anticipation of the release of their
music video for their song Way It Was.
They made the stream available on demand
and made it possible to watch it in the
highest quality all the way up to 4K.
Once you get the hang of streaming and
get some clear indications that your
fans have an appetite for your streams,
consider streaming relatively
consistently. This doesn't have to be
every day or even every other week, but
create consistent touch points where
fans can expect to catch you live.
Look at live strategy for example. 80s
does a variety of live streams
throughout the year that spotlight
different interests and personalities
from gaming to cooking that keeps the
biggest fans on YouTube leaned in. In
fact, over 70% of 80s live stream views
in 2025 came from subscribed fans
globally.
And with that, our time has come to an
end. Thank you so so much for joining
us. We hope this master class was
valuable and helped you understand how
you can go live on YouTube and customize
your strategy to fit you and your fans.
As always, for more artist resources,
check out YouTube for artists at
artist.youtube.com
for all our latest tips and how to grow
and thrive on YouTube. I want to say
thank you so much for joining us and
we'll see you next time.